refactor(0003): refine the design for config files (#29)
emqx/eip: active/0003-new-config-files.md

# New Config Files for EMQ X v5.0

## Change log

* 2020-10-19: @terry-xiaoyu first draft created
* 2021-04-13: @terry-xiaoyu refine the design for configuration file syntax and hot-loading

## Abstract

The configuration files of EMQ X is to be changed significantly in EMQ X 5.0, both in its syntax and
its architecture.

This proposal explains the rationale behind its design and describing the changes in detail.

## Motivation

The config files and the config entries need to have the following properties:

- The config files should be more readable and editable to users.

> - The configs should be able to updated at runtime.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It should be possible to update the configs at runtime.
```

> - The config files should be able to upgraded in a backward compatible manner during release hot
>   upgrade.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- It should be possible to upgrade the config files in a backward-compatible manner during release hot
  upgrade.
```

force_shutdown_policy: 10000|64MB
```

The prior is not only more readable to users without reading the comments/documents, but also more
intuitive to programmers for searching the config entry through the code files, as the ConfMap
maintained in the memory is of the same structure (and name) as the config file.

### The Structure of the Config Files

At the beginning of the `emqx.conf` is the notes:

```

> ## NOTE: The configurations in this file will be overridden by `/etc/emqx_overrides.conf`

Reviewer 2: I think it would be better to give the cover order explicitly.

Even without include emqx_ overrides.conf Each program has its own hard coded configuration item.

Like MySQL:

```
> mysql --help
...
Default options are read from the following files in the given order:
/etc/my.cnf /etc/mysql/my.cnf ~/.my.cnf
```

```
cat /etc/mysql/my.cnf
...
!includedir /etc/mysql/conf.d/
!includedir /etc/mysql/mysql.conf.d/
```

Author: As we've discussed, the priority of config files should be conventional not configurable. So we need no `include` instructions in `emqx.conf`.

## NOTE: See the /etc/docs/emqx_config_sample.conf for all the available configurations and
##       examples.
```

The first thing to be configured is the node name:

```
node {
  name: "emqx@127.0.0.1"
}
```

After that is the listeners:

```

> listeners {

Reviewer 2: I hope that the listener can define its own mqtt parameters, and the configuration should be organized hierarchically.
For example, `global → protocol → zone → listener → topic`
Configuration items can be overridden from high level to low level.

```
 max_packet_size: 1MB,
 wildcard_subscription: true
 
 zone {
   name: external_zone
   
   # external zone need reset mqtt package size
   max_packet_size: 128KB
   
   listener {
      type: ssl
      port: 8883
      certfile: etc/certs/cert.pem
      keyfile: etc/certs/key.pem
      acceptors: 16
      max_connections: 100000
   }
   
   listener {
      type: tcp
      address: 0.0.0.0
      port: 1883
   }
 }
```

Author: As we discussed in the last session, we put the zone out sized the listeners:

```
zones.external : {
  listeners.tcp: {
    bind: …
  }
  mqtt : {
    ...
  }
}
```

Reviewer 2: Is the configuration nesting of MQTT redundant?

all MQTT option in `etc/emqx.conf`:

```
mqtt.max_packet_size = 1MB
mqtt.max_clientid_len = 65535
mqtt.max_topic_levels = 0
mqtt.max_qos_allowed = 2
mqtt.max_topic_alias = 65535
mqtt.retain_available = true
mqtt.wildcard_subscription = true
mqtt.shared_subscription = true
mqtt.ignore_loop_deliver = false
mqtt.strict_mode = false
```

#### Mode 1
This nesting is a little strange，does zone’s `mqtt` full coverage global `mqtt` ?

·```
{ "mqtt": { "a": 1, "b": "1" } }
+
{ "mqtt": { "a": 2 } }
=
{ "mqtt": { "a": 2 } }

"b": 1 will be drop.
```

```js
// javascript

var a = { mqtt: { a: 1, b: 2 } }
var b = { mqtt: { a: 2 } }

// 合并
var c = { ...a, ...b }

// 2
console.log(c.mqtt.a)

// undefined
console.log(c.mqtt.b)
```

Intuitively, objects are nested according to the key.

```
# default value
# mqtt.max_topic_alias = 65535

# global
mqtt: {
   max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
   max_topic_alias = 100
}

zones.external: {
  # zone
  mqtt: {
    max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
  }

  listners.tcp: {
    bind: "0.0.0.0.0",
    port: 1883
    # listner
    mqtt: {
      max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
    }
  }
}
```

#### Mode2

I see some config in `etc/zones.conf`,
I actually know what MQTT configuration items are.

```
zone.internal.max_subscriptions = 0
zone.internal.max_inflight = 128
zone.external.max_packet_size = 1MB
```

so, discard MQTT nesting，`mqtt: {} -> {}`
```
max_pacaket_size: 1024KB

zons.external: {
  max_pacaket_size: 1024KB

  listners.tcp: {
    bind: "0.0.0.0.0",
    port: 1883
    max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
  }
}
```

### Mode3
Adding an `mqtt_` prefix might be a better way because we rarely modify config.

```
mqtt_max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
mqtt_max_qos_allowed: 1024KB

zons.external: {
  mqtt_max_packet_size: 1024KB

  listners.tcp: {
    bind: "0.0.0.0.0",
    port: 1883
    mqtt_max_pacaket_size: 1024KB
  }
}
```

Refer Nginx:
```
# ssl
ssl_certificate         /etc/letsencrypt/live/emqx.io/fullchain.pem;
ssl_certificate_key     /etc/letsencrypt/live/emqx.io/privkey.pem;
ssl_trusted_certificate /etc/letsencrypt/live/emqx.io/chain.pem;

# gzip
gzip                    on;
gzip_vary               on;
gzip_proxied            any;
gzip_comp_level         6;

# Proxy timeouts
proxy_connect_timeout              60s;
proxy_send_timeout                 60s;
proxy_read_timeout                 60s;

# logging
access_log /var/log/nginx/emqx.io.access.log;
error_log  /var/log/nginx/emqx.io.error.log warn;
```

    mqtt_path: /mqtt
    max_connections: 512000
  }
}
```

Next comes the remaining part of the config file:

```
broker {
  sys_msg_interval: 1m
  sys_heartbeat_interval: 30s
  shared_subscription_strategy: random
}

log {
  primary_level: warning
  handlers: [{
    type: file
    level: warning
    filename: "{{ platform_log_dir }}/emqx.log"
  }]
}

cluster {
  name: emqxcl
  discovery_strategy: manual
}

rpc {
  mode: async
  tcp_client_num: num_cpu_cores
}
```

That's all. The `emqx.conf` is very concise. I put the complete config files
[here](https://github.com/terry-xiaoyu/emqx/tree/emqx50_shawn/configs).

### Config Update at Runtime

The config files can be modified and reloaded after the emqx broker has been started.
But not all of the config entries are able to updated at runtime.
We should provide some CLIs/APIs to help users for debugging/verifying the changes of the config
files, and showing user the changes applied to the runtime after reloading the config files.

Configs should also be update from the Dashboard/APIs, but we won't solve the conflicts between the
changes from the config file and the APIs, as that would introduce much more complexities than benefits.

> Configuration changes made by the API with a `permanent` option should be written back to the `etc/`

Author: We should let the API fail in this case.

dir. After the ConfMap validates and applies the configs got from API, it dumps all the changed
configs to `emqx_overrides.conf`, in HOCON format.

> If the configs are updated both from the API and config files at the meanwhile, we deny the update

Author: Deny the request is better, this way the behavior is more predictable.
